src/content/about.en.md, before:

---
title: "About"
date: 2022-08-07T20:53:01+08:00
draft: false
menu: "main"
meta: "false"
---

Hi! I'm _Hemashushu_, and I'm a freelancer.

In this website I will share some interesting computer technologies, programming skills and learning notes, and also post some of my software and hardware. Follow me on Twitter [@hemashushu](https://twitter.com/hemashushu) or Github [Hema Shushu](https://github.com/hemashushu) for updates. Please consider donating to me if you find my articles or work helpful. 😋

Note: Most of my software and hardware are **open source and free**, please do not download the modified or re-packaged versions of my work from other web sites, and please do not pay for those. My website address is [https://hemashushu.github.io](https://hemashushu.github.io) (and the mirror [https://hemashushuzsd.gitee.io](https://hemashushuzsd.gitee.io)).

{{< figure src="/images/subscribe-and-donate.en.png" class="mid" >}}

Or donate via Paypal [paypal.me/hippospark](https://paypal.me/hippospark)

These articles are licensed under the [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

Feel free to share my articles, just cite the source.

Commit message:

complete the xiaoxuan-script intro page.

src/content/about.en.md, after:

---
title: "About"
date: 2022-08-07T20:53:01+08:00
draft: false
menu: "main"
meta: "false"
---

Hi! I'm _Hemashushu_, and I'm a freelancer.

In this website I will share some interesting computer technologies, programming skills and learning notes, and also post some of my software and hardware. Follow me on Twitter [@hemashushu](https://twitter.com/hemashushu) or Github [Hema Shushu](https://github.com/hemashushu) for updates. Please consider donating to me if you find my articles or work helpful. 😋

Note: Most of my software and hardware are **open source and free**, please do not download the modified or re-packaged versions of my work from other web sites, and please do not pay for those. My website address is [https://hemashushu.github.io](https://hemashushu.github.io) (and the mirror [https://hemashushuzsd.gitee.io](https://hemashushuzsd.gitee.io)).

{{< figure src="/images/subscribe-and-donate.en.png" class="mid" >}}

Or donate via Paypal [paypal.me/hippospark](https://paypal.me/hippospark)

Feel free to share my software, hardware and articles, just cite the source.

## Q & A

### What do the names _XiaoXuan_ and _XiaoYu_ mean?

They don't have any special meaning, they just sound similar to my children's nicknames.

### Why are there so many "childlike" illustrations on this website?

I originally wanted to create a simple programming language for my kids. They
loved watching me draw simple illustrations, so I added these illustrations to the documentation (web pages) in the hope of attracting their interest.

### Why do some projects only have documentation but no released code or binary packages?

Developing a programming language is a huge undertaking, so many projects are still in heavy development. This means that they are currently just a collection of scattered code, and while they can implement basic functions, they are not ready for release, I will release them when they are ready.

For now, only _XiaoXuan Core_ is complete, you can download it and try it out. I will then release _XiaoXuan Script_, _XiaoXuan Native_, _XiaoXuan Managed_ and other projects.

### Why use the MPL open source license and additional terms instead of other permissive licenses?

Because I am a nobody, I don't want someone or a company to take my work and turn it into their "product". You know, not eveyone respects other people's effort.

### Are all these projects your personal work?

Yes. And most of my work doesn't have "clients", which means that on one pays me and there is no project funding. I would greatly appreciate it if you could sponsor me!
